a war of words between the United
Nations and Israel is escalating with
the Israeli Ambassador calling for the
resignation of Secretary General Antonio
gueras after a speech on Tuesday gueras
spoke to the media earlier saying that
he wished to set the record straight and
he criticized those that who claimed he
had Justified attacks by
Hamas I am shocked by the
misrepresentations by some of my
statement yesterday in the security
Council as
if as if I was justifying acts of Terror
by
amas this is
false it was the
opposite Kristen salumi is at the United
Nations in New York can you tell us
where this is coming from and why guer
feels the need to set the record
straight in his
words right well yesterday during the
security council meeting on the
situation in the Middle East uh gutes in
his remarks did as you just heard uh
talk about the situation in the Middle
East uh he said in those remarks that
what is happening in Gaza didn't happen
in a vacuum or sorry what Hamas did and
what is happening in the Middle East uh
didn't happen in a vacuum that the
Palestinians have been subjected to 56
years of occupation that prompted a very
very angry response from the Israeli
delegation uh foreign minister Eli Cohen
cancelled his visit with the Secretary
General that was scheduled for later in
the day the Israeli Ambassador said that
the Secretary General should resign and
that Israel was going to cancel uh visas
for diplomats including Martin Griffith
uh the chief humanitarian under
Secretary General here at the United
Nations who is um in the region he's
been in Egypt and was scheduled to go to
Israel uh they're saying they're not
going to give him a visa to come to the
country because of these remarks uh
which they said seem to uh
justify uh hamas's Terror attacks uh
which as you just heard the Secretary
General vehemently denied and I can tell
you I was in uh the here listening to
his remarks he did very much condemn The
Taking of uh civilians the attacks on
civilians and so forth um but it was
those uh remarks that prompted this
angry reaction from the Israeli
delegations I should also point out that
the UN hasn't confirmed uh whether or
not Martin Griffith is still planning to
travel if the Visa has in fact been
canceled or where where things stand but
that was the threat that was made by the
uh Israeli
team Kristen this is a remarkable uh
what's been happening between the UN
Secretary General and Israel over the
last 24 hours we're thank you very much
for that reporting we're going to go to
Alan Fischer who is joining us now from
occupied East Jerusalem for the Israeli
side of this Alan uh I suppose the
question is number one explain Israel's
reaction to What Guera said and what
they're doing
now
Alan can you hear
me all right it looks like uh we're GNA
work on the audio on that and bring Alan
Fischer in with us just momentarily we
definitely need the other side of the
version of the other version the other
side of the story the Israeli side um I
want to bring in Sultan Barakat you're a
professor of public policy at hammad bin
Khalifa
University the speech we heard from the
UN Secretary General and anonio gajer
about an hour yeah about an hour ago now
it was a two-minute speech and he felt
the need to set the record straight he
said no I'm I'm I'm not justifying
terrorism that is absolutely not what
I'm doing have you ever seen a un
Secretary General do anything like that
or have to do anything like that well un
secretary generals are very experienced
diplomats and they're always they have
to weigh their words very very carefully
and I think gues in particular is is
very very uh knowledgeable and you know
he's as old as the state of Israel and
this man before taking o over as a
Secretary General in 2016 he served
almost for 10 years as the head of the
United Nation Refugee agency so he
understands the meaning of his Wars The
Suffering that people go through and so
on and before that as you know he was
the prime minister of Portugal for a
number of years so he's not a
lightweight politician who doesn't know
what he's saying he's saying it because
not only him he believes it but he
speaks on behalf of an organization the
United Nations has more repur working on
Palestine than anywhere else in the
world he must have a piece of paper on
his desk related to Palestine I would
suspect every single day so he knows
what is going on so when he says we have
to place this into context and not rush
into pretending as if things have
happened on the sth again that's where
this all started is because yesterday
his speech at the UN um at the United
Nations he said the Hamas attacks did
not happen in a vacuum that's the quote
that really sparked Israel's anger well
what it did to me I think it highlighted
The Bullying nature of the state of
Israel you know this uh the the state
Secretary or the foreign secretary for
for Israel reacted almost immediately in
that meeting and called for his
resignation only Israel can afford to do
this no other state before has been able
to call for the resignation of the
Secretary General in this immediate uh
way uh it the now the call for
withdrawing visas Etc this is going back
to the days of Al Bashir in Sudan you
know this is very very authoritarian
regimes actions towards the united
nation of course Israel what's what's
the play for Israel here because if you
start talking about not granting visas
to un High diplomats if you start saying
that the UN Secretary General you're
accusing them of justifying terrorism
Etc um are they trying to discredit the
UN because at the same time in parallel
to this we're seeing the UN trying to
come up with common language that would
perhaps uh call for a a pause in
Israel's bombardment of Gaza and
presumably Israel wants none of take it
of course discrediting the UN is at the
center of this strategy I think at this
moment because uh the only thing that
protects the Palestinians right today is
the legal side on the ground they're
occupied the Israelis are expanding the
settlements are expanding they're
winning they're taking everything the
only thing that's standing between them
and creating a Jewish only state in
Palestine is the the legality of the
legal resolutions that have been passed
by the UN and Israel is not new to this
they've been trying to disc to to disc
discredit the UN for a long long time
and they will continue uh one important
point to not is the UN does not
designate Hamas as a terrorist
organization the US does the EU does
even maybe Saudi Arabia does but not the
United Nations so as far as he's
concerned he's not talking about uh a
terrorist organization that has
undertaken terror act of Terror inside
Israel nevertheless he did refer to the
terrorizing effect of the attack Hamas
undertook uh into Israel so it's it's
quite complex and I think this is the
last or the most important issue that
Israel wants to attack now is the
legality of the situation they hope that
as a result of this war there will be
new nations Gathering talks about about
a new reality and uh a move away from
the status quo that exists at the moment
using again the UN corridors but uh
based on their choice and their own
Arrangement Sultan Barakat thank you
very much for that I want to go back now
to uh Alan Fischer uh Allan is in
occupied East Jerusalem so following the
row with the UN there's a diplomatic row
between turke and Israel Allan tell us
more about that
one
well the relations between turkey and
and Israel were getting better but
they've been FR since around 2010 when a
flotilla of ships tried to break uh the
blockade around Gaza and a number of
turkey citizens were killed as I say
things were getting better but then just
in the last few hours right erdogan from
Tura the Turkish president said that
Hamas was not a terrorist organization
that it's fighting for its land and
there had been plans for him to visit
Israel he said now there will be no
visit H and Israel took advantage of
turkey's good intentions well there's
been a response from the Israeli foreign
minister uh Ministry from that in in the
last couple of hours they have said that
they reject uh what T erdogan has
said described Hamas as a Despicable
terrorist organization and he said
Turkish should attempts to pretend uh do
not change the horrors that the world
has seen uh just as those relations were
getting better it seems that they are
now hold below the waterline and things
between ankor and the government in
Israel are perhaps the lowest point
they've been since that event way back
in
2010 Ellen Fischer reporting there from
occupied East Jerusalem thank you very
much